Hurricane Island Baseline Phenology
================
by Alex Pesek & Asher Panikian

## Summary

Phenology is the study of timings of the seasonal life stages of
organisms. Some examples of phenological happenings include when mammals
are birthing, when birds are fledging, or when pollinators are being
active. This dataset focuses on plants, whose timings are important
within the context of providing resources for other organisms, such as
pollen for insects and berries for herbivores. The purpose of this
project is to collect a baseline of phenology data for Hurricane Island
to be used in comparative analyses as the climate changes.

Outline: Define phenophase

(explain that each observaiton hast he date and then information about
the individual; the real observations made w ere counts, percentages,
presence/absence and one categorical variable about pollen amount being
“none, little, or some”.)

SLIDES 1-3: Set the scene Intro context to why phenology is important
what the purpose of the project is talk a little about the data Talk
about the problem/main question we have SLIDES 4-(WHATEVER)
Sub-questions we have about the data what our main plots are telling us
(our main plots are the giant lollipop phenology thing, the animation
and the map and the berries) CONCLUSION recap main findings limitations
and conclusions implications of the project how we would continue work
if we had more time

Write-up of your project and findings go here. Think of this as the text
of your presentation. The length should be roughly 5 minutes when read
out loud. Although pacing varies, a 5-minute speech is roughly 750
words. To use the word count addin, select the text you want to count
the words of (probably this is the Summary section of this document, go
to Addins, and select the `Word count` addin). This addin counts words
using two different algorithms, but the results should be similar and as
long as you’re in the ballpark of 750 words, you’re good! The addin will
ignore code chunks and only count the words in prose.

You can also load your data here and present any analysis results /
plots, but I strongly urge you to keep that to a minimum (maybe only the
most important graphic, if you have one you can choose). And make sure
to hide your code with `echo = FALSE` unless the point you are trying to
make is about the code itself. Your results with proper output and
graphics go in your presentation, this space is for a brief summary of
your project.

## Presentation

Our presentation can be found [here](presentation/presentation.html).

## Data

Include a citation for your data here. See
<http://libraryguides.vu.edu.au/c.php?g=386501&p=4347840> for guidance
on proper citation for datasets. If you got your data off the web, make
sure to note the retrieval date.

## References

List any references here. You should, at a minimum, list your data
source.
